---
layout: splash
permalink: /
header:
    overlay_image: /assets/images/image_header.jpg

img_scenario_overlap:
  - image_path: /assets/images/ScenarioOverlap.jpg
    alt: "Macro-tensions defining the scenario space. Overlap of scenarios to explore key issues, trends, and possibilities."
    title: "Macro-tensions defining the scenario space. Overlap of scenarios to explore key issues, trends, and possibilities."
---


{% raw %}
<p>
<iframe src="https://miro.com/app/live-embed/uXjVPLSmLx0=/?moveToViewport=3124,-2016,2588,2053&amp;embedAutoplay=true" width="1235" height="732" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" allowfullscreen=""></iframe>
</p>
{% endraw %}

This report is the culmination of a multi-phase foresight project undertaken by the European Union Agency for Asylum (EUAA) to better understand the complex interactions that are shaping the futures of international protection. The bulk of this report presents four scenarios that present alternative images of plausible futures from the year 2032. Each scenario accounts for divergent developments of key factors that are together shaping the outlook on international protection through the year 2030. These scenarios are particularly concerned with the development of key factors _external_ to the European Union, including global armed conflict, impacts of climate change, food and water scarcity, and developing digital technologies. For all of these key factors, each scenario narrative outlines how the factors develop and interact to create fundamentally new global conditions.

The scenarios present a broad range of possible futures concerning those global conditions, and their impact on the stakeholders and institutions related to international protection. In the more optimistic scenario, extensive technological solutions are used to improve living conditions in many regions of the world, thus changing the various pressures that have led to increasing international protection applications in the past. Two other scenarios present different configurations of geopolitical power and the alternative types of technological, economic, and political competition that can emerge and change international protection operations and policy. One scenario was created in which the interaction of extreme weather events, military conflicts and the use of digital surveillance technologies leads to an extreme escalation of the situation in the area of international protection.
Given the desire for EUAA to better understand and prepare for uncertain long-term futures, to prove effective the scenarios must do more than tell an interesting story. To that end, the narratives were individually analysed to identify specific challenges that emerge for international protection institutes under the scenario’s unique future conditions. These scenario-specific challenges provide insights for a range of particular future conditions, but taken in aggregate three overarching challenge areas were identified for institutional planning and strategy to address.

**_Geopolitical tensions and international relations_**  was identified as one key challenge area for international protection institutes to monitor and integrate into preparedness activities and strategic planning. Being prepared for the ramifications of armed conflict at different scales is a chief challenge, given the rapidity with which conflict can emerge and escalate. Additionally, the changing relationships between traditional destination and countries in the route between these and the countries of origin  (i.e. economic development and funding programmes in these countries) effects expectations for all stakeholders in international protection. Finally, destabilisation of and disagreement within longstanding international governance organisations can radically complicate the international protection convention and how it is interpreted. 

At the same time, rapid technological developments in **_Digitalisation and Data_** often appear to harbour opportunities for efficiency gains in arenas like the processing of international protection applications, remote interviews, translation assistants, and decision support with artificial intelligence (AI). However, there are strong challenges for the adoption of such technologies. The development of cross institutional standards or protocols, and ensuring their being adhered to creates new burdens, and may require expertise and skills that are not currently available. Furthermore, safeguarding data integrity and cyber security are just two instances of challenges that new technological deployment engenders.

Lastly, a number of challenges arise with intensifying effects of _**Climate Change and Resources**_ become scarcer or unreliably available. While current international interpretation does not include ‘climate refugees’, changing weather patterns can alter traditional regional agricultural capacities through drought, desertification, flooding, and extreme weather events. While some of these effects may be temporary, displaced populations will strain resources in the regions where they land, and over longer time frames this sets the stage for socio-political disruptions that can create asylum-seekers. As we have recently seen, disruptions to global supply chains including new restrictions, geopolitical tensions, and damages to infrastructure can also set up conditions for the emergence of new international protection applicants. 
While some of these challenge areas are outside of the control of institutions like the EUAA, taken individually or together, the scenarios and accompanying analysis outline specific challenges that organisations can begin to prepare for in terms of, for example, staff, training, strategic plans, building robust networks, and policy adjustments. Taking uncertainties and interdependencies into account, each scenario notably specifies how factors have evolved and effected change to international protection systems. In presenting these scenarios here, the project partners offer some productive insights into the possible futures for international protection, and a set of scenarios that enables stakeholders to better prepare themselves to achieve their missions going forward.
